And absolutely nothing was geared up for the
expansion that was facing them. They didn't have
the faculty, they didn't have the facilities,
they had nothing to adjust for that explosion of
students that they faced beginning in 46. But I was
fortunate because I had the points to get out of the
service very early. 22nd of September was pretty
early after it ended. And then number two, I had
completed my pre-professional requirements
with the exception of one chemistry course or
something. So I came and stopped by and talked to
Dean Marsteller, showed him my transcript. I
don't know where I'd gotten that. I guess I had the
foresight to pick that up. But I had my transcript,
showed him what I'd completed. And so, because I
was out so early, there still weren't, there
wasn't very many people applying at that point in
time. And because I had all the requirements, I
just walked in school and said, sure, report next
Monday. Really? So, I did. By the next year or two,
it was, it got very competitive to get in school.
Because there were only ten veterinary schools at
that time. But, uh, That fall, I didn't have any
trouble at all. How many classmates did you have?
Well, I had, in the fall of 45, I started with a mixed
class. I'm going to guess there were about 40 or 45
of us all together, about half veterans and about
half youngsters, young people that had just
finished the two-year requirement in the Corps.
Right. So about half that class in the fall of 45 was
veterans, about half were young people. Because I
remember a lot of horseplay between the two
groups. The veterans were, I was probably one of
the younger veterans. And I guess I was, what, 22,
23 years old. And I was one of the younger ones. And
some of the veterans went on up to 30, 35. So it was a
broad range of ages. And of course, the poor kids
were about 18 in those days. Now, you had the
requirements were done basically two years of
college. As a matter of fact, on the books, you
didn't even need two years of college. And you
never did receive a bachelor's degree. What was
your opinion of that? And now what is it as a dean?
Well, I think we started promoting the bachelor's
degree for students after we could no longer take
them, all after two years.
when we could take the students after the required
number of courses, the 66 hours that we have now,
when we could admit them, I think that's a good
program. But when we started, we had to limit
enrollment, and we could no longer admit all the
well-qualified youngsters after two years. Then
we had to say, hey, you have to get onto a degree
program. and complete a bachelor's degree in some
field of interest, whether it's animal science or
agricultural economics or business or whatever.
Get a degree. Get something. Because you may not
get into veterinary school, or you may not get in
until you've had three or four years of college
work. So I believed in the bachelor's degree. I
never did get one, but I just In fact, I tried to when
I came back here and entered veterinary school. I
took a few more agricultural courses trying to
qualify for the bachelor's degree by the time I
graduated. But I missed it by, I don't know,
something like six or eight hours. And it wasn't
important enough to spend another semester.
Let's talk about the vet school when you came back
in the 1940s, and let's compare not the tangibles,
like how much it's changed as far as the size, and as
far as the curriculum, we can read that out of the
documents, but some of the intangibles, like the
quality of instruction. Could you compare what
you thought was the quality of instruction back
then versus today? Yes, of course the quality of
instruction from the technical standpoint the
young people today get so much better education in
the technical aspects of our profession. In
surgery, anesthesiology, the education is a
thousand times better than what we got. More
resources. The resources are so much better. The
laboratories and equipment are so much better.
Everything, of course. But, of course, 30 years or
35 years is a lot of time, too. But From the
standpoint of the
quality of teachers and of the sort of the
intangibles of veterinary education, I'm not
sure we've improved that much. We had some great
teachers. We had people like John Miliff who
headed anatomy, Pat Burns who headed physiology,
Dick Turk in parasitology. August Leonard in
medicine. Great men.
Because our classes were smaller, their
influence on our lives was greater. They had a
tremendous impact on us as people, as future
professionals.
I think maybe we've lost ground in that respect.
Because of the enlargement? Because of the
enlargement and because the youngsters do not get
as much of the professional integrity as we got
from some of those giants of another era. We have a
lot of team teaching. And especially under our
accelerated program, where many times students
really never got to know their teachers that well.
And they missed some things. So on balance, Terry,
I'd say it's a trade-off. We're doing a lot better
in some areas, but nothing is all positive, just
like the New Deal of the Great Society, you know.
Nothing's all positive. True. What about another
intangible, and that is the quality of the
students, your colleagues back then versus
today? Well, that's, again, a little bit hard to
compare because In the 40s and 50s, most of the
young, and it was almost all young men, because
women were not on the scene in our profession, only
to a very limited degree. The young men almost all
came from the family farm, the small farm. Most of
them had a different background in that different
sense of values, a different approach to life. It
was pre-television era, pre-nuclear science
era. There was so much difference. We were not as
well prepared for college, I don't think, at least
Maybe we were as well prepared for what we were
facing as the youngsters what they face today. We
did not have the in-depth mathematics that I know
that was always a deficiency I had. I never had
calculus, and I should have had a deeper, much more
in-depth training in mathematics.
I suppose that the young man and woman of the 40s and
50s was better,
much more oriented in American agriculture than
they are today. Now where do you find that most of
your students come from? An awful lot of them come
from the big cities. Middle America and
modest and large cities. But we receive a lot of our
students right out of Houston, Dallas, San
Antonio, especially the young women. A lot of them
come from that background.
I'm not saying it's bad. No, it's different, and
that's the point. It's
different. Now, let's talk about your favorite
instructors. Let's talk about some of the ones
that you had in Millock. I've interviewed him. He
was one of my favorites. He gave an excellent
interview. We had a wonderful time. A giant,
strong-willed, very great teacher. A good
positive influence. A conservative, very
conservative man. I'm sure you picked him. But he
was very able, broadly trained, probably one of
the best educated men that I had. Dick Turk, in
parasitology, a natural wit, a man who, if he had
not gone to veterinary school, could have given
Bob Hope some trouble as a showman, and one of the
sharpest natural wits I've ever seen. Excellent
teacher.
Those men were professionals in that they had come
through the school of hard knocks, and they taught
us A lot about surviving in the real world.
Dr. Burns, I had great respect for him. I did not
consider him to be such a great teacher. He was very
methodical. I thought he worked a little bit too
hard to keep students from cheating. That was
always kind of a humorous thing because he didn't
tolerate anything. He didn't tolerate any
academic dishonesty.
Another man that I had great respect for didn't
stay here very long after I left. His name was
George Eads. E-A-D-S? E-A-D, I believe. E-D-D-S,
that's the way he spelled his name. Eads, E-D-D-S.
He's in Florida. He has not retired. Soon will, I
guess. He taught pharmacology, and he was a master
disciplinarian So many of the Aggies in that day
dreaded his class and his course because he was
very demanding. But I never had any trouble with
it. In fact, I sort of enjoyed it because I enjoyed
the subject. His approach to teaching didn't
bother me, but it did a lot of people. What about
Jaggie? Dr. Jaggie was I don't know. I did not leave
with as good of an impression of Dr. Jaggi as some
people did, I suppose.
I
did not think he was a bad teacher, but he always
started off well organized. The first two or three
weeks of his course were usually good, but then
after that it sort of tailed off. I saw him as an
average teacher. Now did the dean at that time do
any teaching? Dr. Marsteller's health failed. He
was failing in health when I came back here. I
didn't realize it, but the next year he went, as we
say in the veterinary slang, he went downhill
fast, physically.
went on to disabled, became disabled, and was
relieved of his administrative duties in 1946. So
I never had a course under Dr. Marsteller. Now, a
lot of my contemporaries did, but I didn't. The
acting dean for the next two years was a man by the
name of Dunn, D-U-N-N, a pathologist,
microbiologist, and I had courses under him. He
was an excellent teacher. Remarkable that I had
courses under him in pathology and radiology, and
they were all top-line. Excellent teacher. And at
that time, the dean taught at least one course?
Yes. And is that today? Well, I have a course called
an orientation course in just a few, 15 lectures or
so. And when I can't get time, I sometimes go into
the parasitology laboratory because that was my
training, parasitology. But I don't do much
because the size of the program has increased. And
then the thing that just kills a dean and to a lesser
degree department head today is the emphasis on
accountability. We are constantly reporting or
writing proposals.
Paperwork, the load is unbelievable. I often
think what it would be like if Dr. Francis or
Marsteller or some of those men came back and had to
work as dean for a year today. They'd either go mad
or the program would change one or the other.
because the load of paper is unbelievable
anymore. And there's not very much we can do about
it. It comes from everywhere. The federal
government, the state government, and the
university. Basically an attempt to raise money?
A lot of this? Oh, an awful lot of it is a result of
federal regulations. For example? That start at
every angle, you know, from the, well, The best
example I would give, Terry, would be to cite the
fact that veterinary schools became eligible for
some federal support under the
Health Manpower Act, starting back about 65 or 66.
And then every other year or so, every third year,
There'd be a new Health Manpower Act. So
veterinary medicine qualified for first a little
federal support under institutional grants and
then under what we call capitation grants. Never
amounted to a whole lot of money. I don't think
we've ever gotten more than 6% to 8% of our budget
from the federal government. But that 6% or 8%
brought an enormous amount of problems of
accountability. Because not only... What did you
do with that money? Well, we have used it more or
less for enrichment of our programs. We have used
it to support our Biomedical Learning Resource
Center. You may have visited it down in the
basement where we have medical artists, medical
illustrators, television... engineers, and so
on. You'll have to stop by and look at it. We've used
it to support that unit. We've used it a bit to
support the residency training program that
we've developed in the clinical areas. So it's
been an enrichment for us. We have not used it to pay
salaries of faculty because we never know. One
year for the next, we'd have it. So we try to avoid
that. And we've used it to buy equipment, special
equipment with, do some remodeling with in some
areas. We've used it in a lot of ways, but those have
been the main ones. But in the process, we've
brought on an awful lot of accountability on
ourselves. Not only just with... What type of
regulations? Not only with regard to that, but we
have to... to show from almost every angle that we
are not discriminating against women, against
minorities, against this and against that. And we
find ourselves just submitting reports all the
time. And of course, they constantly keep the
hammer over your head. If you don't do it, you lose
your federal support. Now, I wouldn't want to
imply that it's all federal either. Because
there's an awful lot of accountability coming
from the state, such areas as the Coordinating
Board of Higher Education. They'll decide that
you're going to account for this course that
you're training or this one that you're not using
or this doctoral program that is debatable and
should it be deleted. And so you find yourself just
once right after the other. And sometimes you
couldn't really trace it back to the federal
level, but it had been brought on by the federal
level by a force that they're exerting against the
coordinating board or against the legislative
budget board or some other group that we live with.
And the result is a heck of a lot of paperwork. A lot
of paperwork. And then, of course, had a lot of
proposals, because we tried to get money from
wherever we came. And this has resulted in our
doing some things that we never would have done a
few years ago. Because of the pressures to gain
admission to the college, we have had to, or do we
have to, but we elected to, got
a advisory committee to the college. This is a
16-member advisory board that's made up about
half from practicing veterinarians, and the
other half come from commodity groups, powerful
political groups in Texas, like the Texas
Southwestern Cattle Raisers, Texas Dairy
Association, those people. Well, when we got an
advisory board, then almost immediately we had to
educate that board to what we do. So we had meeting
after meeting. We had to submit a lot of material to
them to study about our admission system, our
different programs we have at the college, our
research program, our clinical teaching
program. Then we had them here repeatedly,
several different meetings, in which we would
present show and tells of what we're doing.
Because they had to, in order for them to be
helpful, they had to learn what we're doing. And
then we have a development council now, which is
another group that we're trying to use to help us
raise monies from private sector. But each time
you bring those things on, you increase the
paperwork in the needs office by geometrical
levels.
So we find ourselves spending so much time trying
to communicate. Some of it is not mandatory. Some
of it we do ourselves because we need we have to do. I
wouldn't mean to imply that that uncle or somebody
in Washington or somebody in Austin has a heavy
hand on our necks to report. That's only partially
true. Part of it we bring on ourselves. To compete
for funds. That's right. And to justify our
programs and build the image of our programs in the
state. Now let's turn to the University of
Missouri. You left Texas A&M, your first job was at
Missouri. You stayed there for how many years, a
number of years? 25 altogether, almost, 24 and a
half. Can you make some comparisons with their
program and Texas A&M? The program at Missouri was
much, much smaller. After
I went to Missouri, I was in private practice for a
brief period. And then I went back to the
university as a faculty member, a youngster. Then
I was gone two different times to graduate school.
Early 1940s, I went to Auburn, and later went to
Minnesota. And by the time I came back to Missouri,
I enjoyed Missouri. It's a great state, a great
place to live. A wonderful period of our lives was
there, reared a family there. It's middle
American ever since, very conservative state.
The name show me is pretty well right.
lived in Columbia at the University of Missouri,
an old, old university established in 1836, a very
traditional university. The values of academia
as might be manifested at Harvard or Yale or
somewhere is there because of its age and because
it had the university tradition we've always
We're kind of amused at Texas A&M because it's a
Johnny-come-lately to the university realm. It
was a military school prior to 1960, mid-'60s. But
as
I mentioned, we always went back to Missouri. I had
the privilege there working under some very fine
people, with some fine people. Again, some old,
rugged individuals of the veterinary
profession. But Missouri's program was, of
course, new in 1950, almost. It started in the late
40s. When I went there in 1949 and joined the
faculty, I think the total size of the faculty was
about 15. And we only took 30 students a year for a
long time. And even when the faculty got what we
call big, about 30 people,
it was small and conservative. And we had, I think,
the ability to get to know our students almost like
our children. We usually knew them by first names.
We knew their wives, how many children they had,
because many of them were veterans in the early
50s. So it was a very close personal element, a
family-like environment. How about the quality
of instruction? By today's standards, it
wouldn't be good. By the standards of 1950, it was
adequate, not outstanding. We didn't have a
research program of any importance until early
1960.
So it was mostly just a teaching program, and a few
people were doing a little bit of research.
Today's standards, it wouldn't be good. But
everything involved, and you can't compare
Muhammad Ali with Jack Dempsey, for instance.
Exactly. Exactly.
What about your graduate training? Why did you
decide to go to Auburn, and then why did you decide
to go to Minnesota? Minnesota? All right. I went to
Auburn because my dean, Dean Holly Groth, had been
at Auburn and had been a director of the federal
laboratory there. And he knew the young man who had
just gotten his doctor of science degree from John
Hopkins in parasitology, had a high regard for
him, and he encouraged me to go to Auburn. I did go
there, and I never regretted it.
I moved ahead a bit as a result of that man's
influence. Dr. Wilford Bailey, who was my
master's advisor at Auburn, was a young man and was
full of drive, very progressive, a good
scientist, and he had a good influence on me. So I
was pleased that I had the opportunity to go to
Auburn. Why didn't you stay there for a PhD? They
didn't have a PhD program in those days. I had to
have gone to Hopkins or somewhere at that time. So I
went back to the University of Missouri and worked
for another six or eight years. Then I realized
that I needed more in-depth training in research,
for research, and I also knew that realize that I'm
staying there doing the same thing year after
year, slipping somewhat professionally. So I
looked around for a way to go to graduate school.
Minnesota was well-respected, and I thought in
those days they had one of the first-rate graduate
schools offered for veterinarians. I went to
Minnesota because I had a good working
relationship between veterinary medicine and
human medicine. And I was able to do most of my work
at the medical school at Minnesota, rather than
the veterinary school. At that time. Strong
research. Mayo influence, you know, was very
strong. So I went to Minnesota for that reason.
Number two, because they had an arrangement where
I didn't have to stay the whole time. I could go
there, complete my residency requirements and
then do my dissertation in absentia. And I had a
good arrangement at Missouri to do my
dissertation. It was close enough that I could
keep close contact with my major professor. And I
was able to get a National Science Faculty
Fellowship.
By that time, I had children getting a pretty good
size and all the family responsibilities. So that
was the reason I went to Minnesota. And what way did
your graduate training then help you? Yeah,
that's a good question. Because I went to graduate
school and did my dissertation in absentia,
completed that in 1965, and almost immediately
went into administration.
Never did do much research. I never, I have no...
claim to a research career at all. I think the thing
that helped me was it gave me a good respect for
research and its importance in the educational
process. But I never had any great research
accomplishments. Never had time. Immediately, I
was named chairman of the department. Well,
actually, I moved into the dean's office a little
bit before I was named head of the microbiology
department. And for about five years, I tried to do
both, service head of the department and
assistant dean, too. And I finally decided I can't
do that. That's not good. Killed you. Killed you.
So I gave up the department headship in 69, I think
it was. and became associate dean for academic
affairs. Worked with admissions, curriculum,
instruction. I guess what I loved most that I've
ever done. I really enjoyed that. Really? Why do
you say that? Because it was still a small program
and because you could get to know the? Well, I enjoy
veterinary medical education. I believe it's
important. And those were the areas where I
thought I could get the best feeling and maybe have
the best influence. There's admission because
your program's never better than the quality of
young people you admit. Absolutely. And
curriculum is vital because you have to
constantly struggle to improve the curriculum
and keep it relevant to the needs of the graduate.
And instruction is so vital because it needs a
constant update if we've increased class size to
keep the instructors reaching to the maximum. the
young people with the best education. So I just
feel a very important area. I enjoyed it. I worked
in that area for nine years. And sometimes after
coming here, I always wished I had a job back. But so
it's very... Well, let's move to this job. How did
you get it? How did I get it? I don't know. I really
don't know. Did you see an advertisement? I
never... I never really aspired to be a dean.